----------About Thessaloniki--------------------------

Thessaloniki

Welcome the the Thessaloniki web-page! Thessaloniki, the second largest city in Greece with a population of 1,000,000 inhabitants, is one of the oldest cities in Europe. It stretches over twelve kilometers in a bowl formed by low hills facing a bay that opens into the Gulf Thermaikos.

The town has today two quite distinct sectors: The "old town", continuously undergoing reconstruction, and the modern sector, whose many modern buildings are examples of advanced architecture.

In this web page you can learn more about the history of the city, and see the places you can visit in Thessaloniki.

-----------The History of Thessaloniki-----------------

The Early years

Thessaloniki was founded about 315 B.C., on a site of old prehistoric settlements going back to 2300 B.C., by Cassander, King of Macedonia, and was named after his wife, Thessaloniki, sister of  Alexander The Great.

The Byzantine times

In Byzantine times, Thessaloniki became a cultural and artistic centre second only to Constantinople in the whole empire. Great names are closely associated with the city's Byzantine past - the jurist Peter Magister, the epigrammatist Macedonius Hypatus, the Hymnographer Archbishop Joseph, Leo the Mathematician, the historian John Cameniates, the prolific Homeric scholar and humanist Eustathius (Archbishop of Thessaloniki), the philologist Thomas M. Magister, the teacher of law and editor of the "Hexabiblus" Constantine Armenopoulos, the theologian Gregory Palamas (Archbishop of Thessaloniki), to mention but a few prominent scholars.

The Ottoman times

After the fall of Thessaloniki (1430) and later of Constantinople (1453), the two major cultural centres of the East, two of Thessaloniki's greatest humanists, Theodore Gazes and Andronicus Callistus, sought refuge in the West where they transplanted the Greek language and literature. Despite the unfavourable conditions prevailing during the Turkish occupation, there were Greek schools in Thessaloniki that struggled, successfully to a large degree, to preserve the Greek language and literature until the city was liberated in October 26, 1912, the anniversary of its patron saint, St. Demetrius. In the nineteenth century the long scholarly tradition of the city was continued by Margaritis Demetsas, a historian, archeologist, and geographer as well as headmaster of the city Grammar School and his pupil P. Papageorgiou, later a prominent philologist.

Today!

Today Thessaloniki is a thriving city and one of the most important trade and communications centres in the Mediterranean. This is evident from its financial and commercial activities, its port with its special Free Zone, which provides facilities to the other Balkan countries, its international airport, its important industrial complex, its annual International Trade Fair, etc.

----------Places to visit in Thessaloniki---------------------------------

Monuments

Among the numerous monuments of particular interest in the city are those from the Roman period, the Triumphal Arch of Galerius (Kamara) and the Rotonda. Thessaloniki is, however, above all famous for its Byzantine period, being second only to Constantinople itself. Its many churches whose fine mosaics and wall-paintings are representative of various periods of Byzantine art have survive to enhance the image of the city. One of the most beautiful church is that of Agia Sofia (Ag. Sofia). Large sections of the city-walls (kastra) are also still standing, together with one of their main bastions, the well-known White Tower (lefkos Pyrgos).

Other places to visit

For a combination of shopping and sightseeing we recomment you visit Navarinou str (Navarino) and Vardaris Square (Vardaris). In addition you may enjoy a walk on the famous Aristotelous str (Aristotelous).

For a more cultural outing try to book a seat at the Macedonian Study Theater (theater), or if it is Early September that you visit the city, visit the Helexpo (ekthesi).

-----------Pictures from Thessaloniki--------------------------------------

Thessaloniki, also known as the bride of Thermaikos, is one of the most beautiful cities in Greece.  There are numerous pictures of the city, here you may enjoy some of them.


-----------References-----------------------------------------

Apostolos Papagiannopoulos,Monuments of Thessaloniki, Rekos Ltd, date unknown.
Apostolos P. Vacalopoulos, A History of Thessaloniki, Institute for Balkan Studies,1972.
John R. Melville-Jones, 'Venice and Thessalonica 1423–1430 Vol I, The Venetian Accounts, Vol. II, the Greek Accounts, Unipress, Padova, 2002 and 2006 (the latter work contains English translations of accounts of the events of this period by St Symeon of Thessaloniki and John Anagnostes).
Thessaloniki: Tourist guide and street map, A. Kessopoulos, MalliareÌ„s-Paideia, 1988.
Mark Mazower, Salonica, City of Ghosts: Christians, Muslims and Jews, 1430–1950, 2004, ISBN 0-375-41298-0.
Thessaloniki City Guide, Axon Publications, 2002.
Eugenia Russell, St Demetrius of Thessalonica; Cult and Devotion in the Middle Ages, Peter Lang, Oxford, 2010. ISBN 978-3-0343-0181-7
James C. Skedros, Saint Demetrios of Thessaloniki: Civic Patron and Divine Protector, 4th-7Th Centuries (Harvard Theological Studies), Trinity Press International (1999).
Vilma Hastaoglou-Martinidis (ed.), Restructuring the City: International Urban Design Competitions for Thessaloniki, Andreas Papadakis, 1999.
Matthieu Ghilardi, Dynamiques spatiales et reconstitutions paléogéographiques de la plaine de Thessalonique (Grèce) à l'Holocène récent, 2007. Thèse de Doctorat de l'Université de Paris 12 Val-de-Marne, 475 p.